Require type definitions for encoded values (#275)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf: draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf.md

| Parameter         | Description              |
|:------------------|:-------------------------|
| `ID`              | Algorithm identifier for this VDAF. |
| `VERIFY_KEY_SIZE` | Size (in bytes) of the verification key ({{sec-vdaf-prepare}}). |
| `RAND_SIZE`       | Size of the random byte string passed to sharding algorithm. |
| `NONCE_SIZE`      | Size (in bytes) of the nonce. |
| `ROUNDS`          | Number of rounds of communication during the Preparation stage ({{sec-vdaf-prepare}}). |
| `SHARES`          | Number of input shares into which each measurement is sharded ({{sec-vdaf-shard}}). |
| `Measurement`     | Type of each measurement. |
| `PublicShare`     | Type of each public share. |
| `InputShare`      | Type of each input share. |
| `AggParam`        | Type of aggregation parameter. |
| `PrepState`       | State of each Aggregator during Preparation ({{sec-vdaf-prepare}}). |
| `OutShare`        | Type of each output share. |
| `AggShare`        | Type of the aggregate share. |
| `AggResult`       | Type of the aggregate result. |
| `PrepState`       | Aggregator's state during preparation. |
| `PrepShare`       | Type of each prep share. |

> | `PrepMessage`     | Type of each prep messaeg. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `PrepMessage`     | Type of each prep message. |
```

  Protocols MUST ensure that public share consumed by each of the Aggregators is
  identical. This is security critical for VDAFs such as Poplar1.

* `Vdaf.prep_next(prep_state: PrepState, prep_msg: PrepMessage) ->

>   Union[tuple[PrepState, PrepShare], OutShare]` is the deterministic

Author: Interesting. Feel free to follow up with a PR sketching the alternative you have in mind.

  preparation-state update algorithm run by each Aggregator. It updates the
  Aggregator's preparation state (`prep_state`) and returns either its next
  preparation state and its message share for the current round or, if this is
  the last round, its output share. An exception is raised if a valid output
  share could not be recovered. The input of this algorithm is the inbound
  preparation message.

> * `Vdaf.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param: AggParam, prep_shares: lec[PrepShare])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Vdaf.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param: AggParam, prep_shares: Vec[PrepShare])
```

processed any further, and `Finished(out_share)`, which indicates that the
Aggregator has recovered an output share `out_share`.

> 

Author: @tgeoghegan, @branlwyd PTAL at this new bit of normative language.

For convenience, the methods described in this section are defined in terms of
opaque byte strings. A compatible `Vdaf` MUST specify methods for encoding
public shares, input shares, prep shares, and prep messages. Minimally:

> * `Vdaf.decode_public_share(agg_id: Unsigned, encoded: bytes) ->

Author: You're right, great catch!

  Vdaf.PublicShare` decodes a public share, using the aggregator ID as
  optional context.

* `Vdaf.decode_input_share(agg_id: Unsigned, encoded: bytes) ->
  Vdaf.InputShare` decodes an input share, using the aggregator ID as optional
  context.

* `Vdaf.encode_prep_share(prep_share: Vdaf.PrepShare) -> bytes` encodes a prep
  share.

* `Vdaf.decode_prep_share(prep_state: Vdaf.PrepState, encoded: bytes) ->
  Vdaf.PrepShare` decodes a prep share, using the prep state as optional
  context.

* `Vdaf.encode_prep_msg(prep_msg: Vdaf.PrepMessage) -> bytes` encodes a prep
  message.

* `Vdaf.decode_prep_msg(prep_state: Vdaf.PrepState, encoded: bytes) ->
  Vdaf.PrepMessage` decodes a prep message, using the prep state as optional
  decoding context.

Implementations of Prio3 and Poplar1 MUST use the encoding scheme specified in

> {{prio3-encode}} and {{poplar1-encode}} respectively.

Author: This MUST seems, unfortunately, necessary to me. One open question: how will the ping-pong API extend to other VDAFs that aren't in this document?

def ping_pong_transition(
            Vdaf,
            agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
            prep_shares: list[Vdaf.PrepShare],
            prep_state: Vdaf.PrepState,

>          ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):

Author: Ack. This was intentionally left implicit, but `State` would be a superclass of `Continued` et al.

>          ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):

Reviewer: We talked about the lack of a definition of `State`. when ping pong was first added. I've just been working on implementing ping pong in libprio-rs, and I found the implicit definition of the `State` struct to be confusing. I would strongly recommend adding an explicit definition of this enumeration. You will have to do it anyway if you add a ping pong implementation to `poc`.

>          ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):

Author: @tgeoghegan can you send a PR please?

>          ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):

Reviewer: Sure -- I will need to make some DAP changes to catch up with the current ping pong wrapper definitions anyway, and I think I might have a VDAF tweak or two to make.

        if inbound.type == 0: # initialize
            return (Rejected(), None)

        prep_msg = Vdaf.decode_prep_msg(state.prep_state, inbound.prep_msg)
        out = Vdaf.prep_next(state.prep_state, prep_msg)

>         if type(out) == tuple[Vdaf.PrepState, Vdaf.PrepShare] \

Author: Ack. @tgeoghegan this may be worth addressing when you try to rework things so that there no invalid states.

>         if type(out) == tuple[Vdaf.PrepState, Vdaf.PrepShare] \

Author: Filed https://github.com/cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf/issues/283

        if inbound.type == 0: # initialize
            return (Rejected(), None)

        prep_msg = state.prep_state(
            Vdaf.decode_prep_msg(state.prep_state, inbound.prep_msg))
        out = Vdaf.prep_next(state.prep_state, prep_msg)
        if type(out) == tuple[Vdaf.PrepState, Vdaf.PrepShare] \

>                 and inbound.type == 1:

Author: We discussed this a bit in the initial version (https://github.com/cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf/pull/240) and decided this was abusing TLS syntax too much.

| `SHARES`          | in `[2, 256)`                                   |
| `Measurement`     | `Flp.Measurement`                               |
| `AggParam`        | `None`                                          |
| `PublicShare`     | `Optional[list[bytes]]`                         |

> | `InputShare`      | `tuple[Union[tuple[list[Flp.Field],list[Flp.Field]],tuple[bytes, bytes]],Optional[bytes]]` |

Reviewer: For readability, but I'm not sure if Markdown or the RFC renderer will like it:
```suggestion
| `InputShare`      | `tuple[`
|                   | `   Union[`
|                   | `       tuple[list[Flp.Field],list[Flp.Field]],`
|                   | `       tuple[bytes, bytes],`
|                   | `   ],`
|                   | `   Optional[bytes],`
|                   | `]`
```

Author: RFC tools seem to hate this unforutnately.

        Prio3.Flp.PROOF_LEN,
    )

def expand_input_share(Prio3, agg_id, input_share):

>     (meas_share, proof_share, k_blind) = input_share

Reviewer 2: I think the intent is to map each field in the TLS struct to a variable, but it might be confusing to some people. Is it better to use field name to access each variable. For input share, it's more annoying that you have to condition based on leader or helper here. Will something like this be better?

```
if agg_id > 0:
    # helper, `input_share` is a `Prio3HelperShareWithJointRand`.
    meas_share, proof_share, k_blind = input_share.meas_share, input_share.proof_share, input_share.k_blind
    meas_share = Prio3.helper_meas_share(agg_id, meas_share)
    proof_share = Prio3.helper_proof_share(agg_id, proof_share)
else:
    # leader, `input_share` is a `Prio3LeaderShareWithJointRand`.
    meas_share, proof_share, k_blind = input_share.meas_share, input_share.proof_share, input_share.k_blind
return (meas_share, proof_share, k_blind)
```

In total there are four variants of the input share. When joint randomness is
not used, the Leader's share is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3.Flp.Field meas_share[Prio3.Flp.MEAS_LEN];
    Prio3.Flp.Field proof_share[Prio3.Flp.PROOF_LEN];
} Prio3LeaderShare;
~~~

Finally, when joint randomness is not used, the Helpers' shares are structured
as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3Seed k_meas_share;
    Prio3Seed k_proof_share;
} Prio3HelperShare;
~~~

When joint randomness is used, the Leader's input share is structured as
follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3LeaderShare inner;
    Prio3Seed k_blind;
} Prio3LeaderShareWithJointRand;
~~~

Finally, when joint randomness is used, the Helpers' shares are structured as
follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3HelperShare inner;
    Prio3Seed k_blind;
} Prio3HelperShareWithJointRand;
~~~

#### Prep Share

When joint randomness is not used, the prep share is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3.Flp.Field verifier_share[Prio3.Flp.VERIFIER_LEN];
} Prio3PrepShare;
~~~

When joint randomness is used, the prep share includes the Aggregator's joint
randomness part and is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {

>     Prio3.Flp.Field verifier_share[Prio3.Flp.VERIFIER_LEN];

Reviewer 2: nit: here is another opportunity to reuse `Prio3PrepShare`, similar to `Prio3LeaderShare`.

    )
~~~

### Message Serialization {#prio3-encode}

This section defines serialization formats for messages exchanged over the
network while executing Prio3. It is RECOMMENDED that implementations provide
serialization methods for them.

Message structures are defined following {{Section 3 of !RFC8446}}). In the
remainder we use `S` as an alias for `Prio3.Prg.SEED_SIZE` and `F` as an alias
for `Prio3.Field.ENCODED_SIZE`. PRG seeds are represented as follows:

~~~

> uint8 Prio3Seed[S];

Author: Done, here and elsewhere.

~~~

#### Input share

Just as for the public share, the encoding of the input shares dpends on
whether joint randomness is used. If so, then each input share includes the
Aggregator's blind for generating its joint randomness part.

In addition, the encoding of the input shares depends on which aggregator is
receiving the message. If the aggregator ID is `0`, then the input share
includes the full measurement and proof share. Otherwise, if the aggregator ID
is greater than `0`, then the measurement and proof shares are represented by
PRG seeds. We shall call the former the "Leader" and the latter the "Helpers".

In total there are four variants of the input share. When joint randomness is
not used, the Leader's share is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3.Flp.Field meas_share[Prio3.Flp.MEAS_LEN];
    Prio3.Flp.Field proof_share[Prio3.Flp.PROOF_LEN];
} Prio3LeaderShare;
~~~

Finally, when joint randomness is not used, the Helpers' shres are structured
as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Prio3Seed k_meas_share;
    Prio3Seed k_proof_share;
} Prio3HelperShare;
~~~

When joint randomness is used, the Leader's input share is structured as
follows:

~~~
struct {

>     Prio3.Flp.Field meas_share[Prio3.Flp.MEAS_LEN];

Author: That's a good idea. One annoyance is that we'd have to name the field, so instead of 
`leader_share.meas_share` we'd refer to `leader_share.inner.meas_share`:

```
struct {
    Prio3LeaderShare inner;
    Prio3Seed k_blind;
} Prio3LeaderShareWithJointRand;
```

But I think the dedup is really nice so I took your suggestion.

Each of the programmed points `beta` is a vector of elements of some finite
field. We distinguish two types of fields: One for inner nodes (denoted
`FieldInner`), and one for leaf nodes (`FieldLeaf`). (Our
instantiation of Poplar1 ({{poplar1-inst}}) will use a much larger field for
leaf nodes than for inner nodes. This is to ensure the IDPF is "extractable" as
defined in {{BBCGGI21}}, Definition 1.)

A concrete IDPF defines the types and constants enumerated in {{idpf-param}}.
In the remainder we write `Output` as shorthand for the type
`Union[list[list[FieldInner]], list[list[FieldLeaf]]]`. (This type
denotes either a vector of inner node field elements or leaf node field
elements.) The scheme is comprised of the following algorithms:

* `Idpf.gen(alpha: Unsigned, beta_inner: list[list[FieldInner]], beta_leaf:

>   list[FieldLeaf], binder: bytes, rand: bytes[Idpf.RAND_SIZE]) -> tuple[ bytes,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  list[FieldLeaf], binder: bytes, rand: bytes[Idpf.RAND_SIZE]) -> tuple[bytes,
```
(typo nit)

| `SHARES`          | `2`                                     |
| `Measurement`     | `Unsigned`                              |
| `AggParam`        | `Tuple[Unsigned, Tuple[Unsigned, ...]]` |
| `PublicShare`     | `bytes` (IDPF public share)             |

> | `InputShare`      | `tuple[bytes, bytes, list[Idpf.FieldInner], list[Idpf.FieldLeaf]] ` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `InputShare`      | `tuple[bytes, bytes, list[Idpf.FieldInner], list[Idpf.FieldLeaf]]` |
```

    Field = Poplar1.Idpf.current_field(level)
    agg = Field.zeros(len(prefixes))
    for agg_share in agg_shares:
        agg = vec_add(agg, agg_share)
    return list(map(lambda x: x.as_unsigned(), agg))
~~~
{: #poplar1-agg-output title="Computation of the aggregate result for Poplar1."}

### Message Serialization {#poplar1-encode}

This section defines serialization formats for messages exchanged over the
network while executing `Poplar1`. It is RECOMMENDED that implementations
provide serialization methods for them.

Message structures are defined following {{Section 3 of !RFC8446}}). In the
remainder we use `S` as an alias for `Poplar1.Prg.SEED_SIZE`, `Fi` as an alias
for `Poplar1.Idpf.FieldInner` and `Fl` as an alias for
`Poplar1.Idpf.FieldLeaf`. PRG seeds are represented as follows:

~~~

> uint8 Poplar1Seed[S];

Reviewer 4: Likewise
```suggestion
opaque Poplar1Seed[S];
```

~~~

Elements of the inner field are encoded in little-endian byte order (as defined
in {{field}}) and are represented as follows:

~~~

> uint8 Poplar1FieldInner[Fi];
> ~~~
> 
> Likewise, elements of the leaf field are encoded in little-endian byte order
> (as defined in {{field}}) and are represented as follows:
> 
> ~~~
> uint8 Poplar1FieldLeaf[Fl];

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
opaque Poplar1FieldInner[Fi];
~~~

Likewise, elements of the leaf field are encoded in little-endian byte order
(as defined in {{field}}) and are represented as follows:

~~~
opaque Poplar1FieldLeaf[Fl];
```

~~~

#### Public Share

The public share is equal to the IDPF public share, which is a byte string.
(See {{idpf}}.)

#### Input Share

Each input share is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {

>     uint8 idpf_key[Poplar1.Idpf.KEY_SIZE];

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    opaque idpf_key[Poplar1.Idpf.KEY_SIZE];
```

round, then each sketch share has three field elements; if the second round,
then each sketch share has one field element. The field that is used depends on
the level of the IDPF tree specified by the aggregation parameter, either the
inner field or the leaf field.

For the first round and inner field:

~~~
struct {
    Poplar1FieldInner sketch_share[Fi * 3];
} Poplar1PrepShareRoundOneInner;
~~~

For the first round and leaf field:

~~~
struct {
    Poplar1FieldLeaf sketch_share[Fl * 3];
} Poplar1PrepShareRoundOneLeaf;

For the second round and inner field:
~~~
~~~
struct {
    Poplar1FieldInner sketch_share;
} Poplar1PrepShareRoundTwoInner;
~~~

For the second round and leaf field:

~~~
struct {
    Poplar1FieldLeaf sketch_share;
} Poplar1PrepShareRoundTwoLeaf;
~~~

#### Prep Message

Likewise, the structure of the prep message for Poplar1 depends on the
sketching round and field. For the first round and inner field:

~~~
struct {
    Poplar1FieldInner[Fi * 3];
} Poplar1PrepMessageRoundOneInner;
~~~

For the first round and leaf field:

~~~
struct {
    Poplar1FieldLeaf sketch[Fl * 3];
} Poplar1PrepMessageRoundOneLeaf;

> Note that these messages are identical to the prep shares for the same round.
> 
> The second-round prep message is the empty string. This is because the sketch
> shares are expected to sum to a particular value if the output shares are
> valid; we represent this value by the empty string.

Reviewer 4: These paragraphs seem a little confusing, here's a suggested clarification.
```suggestion
Note that these messages have the same structures as the prep shares for the
first round.

The second-round prep message is the empty string. This is because the sketch
shares are expected to sum to a particular value if the output shares are
valid; we represent a successful preparation with the empty string and
otherwise return an error.
```

#### Aggregate Share

> The encoding of the aggregate share depends on whether the inner or leaf field
> is used. It also depends on the number of candidate prefixes, which is
> determined by the aggregation parameter.

Reviewer 4: It's probably worth restating that the choice of field is determined by the aggregation parameter here.
```suggestion
The encoding of the aggregate share depends on whether the inner or leaf field
is used, and the number of candidate prefixes. Both of these are determined by
 the aggregation parameter.
```
